Parusuram Kund

Parshuram Kund was established as a Hindu pilgrimage site in 1970 by hindu missionaries from assam. The truth is Parshuram never came to Arunachal. The Kund originally was established by the pilgrims coming from Assam in the 70s and was promoted as a tourist place, the actual Parshuram Kund mentioned in Mahabharata sits silent in the southern part of India as per the scriptures. But it is situated on the Brahmaputra plateau in the lower reaches of the Lohit River and 21 km north of Tezu in Lohit district of Arunachal Pradesh, India. Dedicated to the deity Parashurama, the popular site attracts pilgrims from Nepal, from across India,including the nearby states of Manipur and Assam. Over 70,000 devotees and sadhus take a holy dip in its water each year on the occasion of Makar Sankranti, in the month of January.

Religious importance
It is a shrine of all-India importance located in the lower reaches of the Lohit River. Thousands of pilgrims visit the place in winter every year, especially on the Makar Sankranti day for a holy dip in the sacred kund which is believed to wash away one's sins. There is a mythological story behind this beautiful place as told by the local people. It is believed that Parashurama the sixth incarnation of Vishnu, on the orders of his father Rishi Jamadagni, beheaded his mother Renuka with his axe. Since he had committed one of the worst crimes of killing one's mother, the axe got stuck to his hand. His father pleased with his obedience decided to give him a boon to which he asked for his mother to be restored back to life. Even after his mother was brought back to life the axe could not be removed from his hand. This was a reminder of the heinous crime he had committed. He repented for his crime and on taking the advice of eminent rishis of that time, he arrived at the banks of Lohit River to wash his hands in its pure waters. It was a way to cleanse him of all the sins. As soon as he dipped his hands into the waters the axe immediately got detached and since then the site where he washed his hands became a place of worship and came to be known by sadhus as Parshuram Kund. Also there are many stories varying from region to region in India that describe the above incident and there are numerous temples dedicated to Parashurama most of which are in Kerala. But this place attracts many pilgrims from near and far and quite a few sanyasis reside here and take care of the temple that is dedicated to Parashurama.

History
The site of the Parashuram Kund as established by the sadhu was in existence until the 1950 Assam earthquake that shook the whole of the North-East and the kund was completely covered. A very strong current is now flowing over the original site of the kund but massive boulders have in a mysterious way embedded themselves in a circular formation in the river bed thus forming another kund in place of the old.[4] The temple which is believed to be the home of Malini (Parvati) is situated on the rocky hills of the Ghagra and Ghai rivers in the Likabali sub-division. Read more here.

Tourism
Annual fair is held during Makara Sankranti, to which wild cows, rare fur-rugs and other curios are brought down by the hill tribes. There are also facilities for trekking from Tezu to glow lake which takes one day, hiking and river rafting and angling on the river Lohit

-------------------------
Golden Pagoda

The Golden Pagoda of Namsai, also known as Kongmu Kham, in the Tai-Khamti language, is a Burmese-style Buddhist temple that was opened in 2010. It is located on a 20 hectares (49 acres) complex in Namsai District of Arunachal Pradesh, India and at a distance of 68 km (42 mi) from the nearest railway station Tinsukia, Assam. A sum of 3 crores was spent by Arunachal politician Chowna Mein, the local MLA in building the pagoda in a plot provided by the state government. The World Tripiṭaka Foundation is currently developing Kongmu Kham as the first international Tripiṭaka center in India.[1][2][3][4]

Kathina Civara Dana
The Kathina festival is the largest festival celebrated at the Golden Pagoda. The 2016 ceremony, held on 13 November also saw participation from Thai Buddhist monks. An image of Buddha which was earlier kept at Wat Bowonniwet Vihara known as the monks gifted the Pro Bpor Ror on behalf of the king Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand. The Thai monks also presented a Kalpatru (Money Tree) to the Golden Pagoda. The ceremony of Loi-Krathong, which is marked by the release of floating lamps into the Mungchalinda Buddha pond, is also held on the festival's last day.[5][6]

-------------
Akashganaga or Malinithan Temple

Malinithan is an archaeological site containing the ruins of an early medieval period temple on the northern bank of the Brahmaputra River in the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh. It is assumed to be built by the Chutia kings in the 13th-14th century.[3][4][5][6] Kechai-Khaiti, a tribal goddess found among the Bodo-kachari groups[7][8][9][10][11][12] or the Buddhist goddess Tara[13] is considered to be the chief deity worshipped in the ruined temple. The worship of the goddess Kechaikheiti even after coming under Hindu influence was performed according to her old tribal customs.[14]

The goddess was taken care of by tribal priest known as the Deoris and was worshipped by the Borgoya khel of the Deoris.[15] There were four different kinds of Deori priest who looked after the deity Kechaikhati. The Bar Bharali and the Saru Bharali collected dues of the temple and provides animals for sacrifice. The Bar Deori (Deori Dema) and the Saru Deori (Deori Surba) performs the sacrifice and sung hymns.[16]

Some scholars identify Kesaikhaiti to the Tai Khamti female deity of Nang Hoo Toungh.[17]

Location
The Malinithan archaeological site is located at the base of the Siang mountains in the Likabali town and a sub-division of the Lower Siang district of Arunachal Pradesh.[18][19] It is situated on a hill that rises to a height of 21 metres (69 ft), which affords a commanding view of the plains around it and of the Brahmaputra River.[20]

Legend
A legend was implanted around the site by Srimanta Sankardev in the 16th century, connecting the place to the mythological king of Bhishmaka (Lord of Vidarbha) of the epics.[21] The association of the legend with the place led to a widespread renaming of the region.[22]

As per the mythology constructed, when Krishna wanted to marry Rukmini, the daughter of King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha, he abducted her prior to her wedding with Shishupala. Krishna and Rukmini then travelled from Bhishmakanagar to Dwarka, stopping at Malinithan on the way over, where they were guests of Shiva and Durga, who were doing penance. Parvati, Shiva's consort, warmly welcoming her guests, presented them with garlands made of flowers plucked from her orchard.[23]

History
From all archaeological evidences at the site, archaeologists have opined that the temple belonged to the 13th century. Stonemason marks found in Malinithan[6] were also found in other sites of Sadiya like Tamreswari temple, Bura-buri, Padum pukhuri as well as other places like Nakshaparbat and Buroi.

Features
The archaeological excavations revealed a very well designed and carved plinth of a temple, 8 feet (2.4 m) high, with sculptures of deities and animals, designs of flowers, damaged columns and panels. Four sculptures of lions on two elephants were found at the four corners of the ruins of the temple.

Among the sculptures found at Malinthan, five notable ones carved out of granite stone are of Indra riding his mount Airavata, Kartikeya riding a peacock, Surya (Sun) riding a chariot, and Ganesha mounted over a mouse and a large Nandi bull.[20] On the basis of the erotic Maithuna sculptures found here in different postures, it is believed that tantricism prevailed here as a fertility rite of the primitive tribal people who held the "mother principal as the procreative power of nature".[24]

The temple is carved entirely out of stone, a type of temple known as Asmamayai. Iron dowels discovered in the ruins of the stone temple resembles the ones found in the Tamreswari temple of Sadiya, showing that it was probably built by the same people.