Website link:  https://www.tirumala.org/
For Booking : https://ttdevasthanams.ap.gov.in/

Tirupati is a city in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is the administrative headquarters of the Tirupati district. The city is home to the important Hindu shrine of Tirumala Venkateshwara Temple and other historic temples. It is located at a distance of 150 km from Chennai, 250 km from Bangalore, 406 km from Amaravati. It is one of the eight Svayam vyakta kshetras (Self-Manifested Temples) dedicated to Vishnu. Tirupati is a municipal corporation and the headquarters of Tirupati (urban) mandal, Tirupati (rural) mandal, and the Tirupati revenue division.[9]

It is the 7th most populous urban agglomeration in the state, with a population of 459,985 in 2011. [3] As of 2011 census, it had a population of 287,035 making it the 9th most populous city in Andhra Pradesh.[3] It is the second biggest city in Rayalaseema after Kurnool. For the year 2012–2013, India's Ministry of Tourism named Tirupati as the "Best Heritage City".[10] Tirupati has been selected as one of the hundred Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under Smart Cities Mission by Government of India.

Etymology
In Dravidian languages, tiru means sacred, Honourable, or Lakshmi and pati means abode, residence, or husband.[11][12][13] Tirupati (Tirumala) is referred to as Pushpa-mandapa in Acharya-Hridayam (13th century).

History
Puranas
According to Varaha Purana, during Treta Yuga, Rama resided here with Sita and Lakshmana on his return from Lankapuri.

As per the Purana, a loan of one crore and 11.4 million gold coins was sought by Balaji from Kubera for his marriage with Padmavathi. To pay back the loan, devotees from all over India visit the temple and donate money.

Ancient history
Tirupati was developed by Pallava Kings from 6th century onwards.[citation needed] The city became a great Vaishnava centre during the time of Ramanujacharya in 11th century, from where Srivaishnavism spread to other parts of Andhra Desa. Srikurmam Temple in Srikakulam district of Andhra Pradesh bears the inscription, Tirupati Srivaishnavula Raksha.[17] Tirupati survived the Muslim invasions by accepting to pay Jizya to the Muslims. During the early 1300s Muslim invasion of South India, the idol of Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple, Srirangam was brought to Tirupati for safekeeping.

Tirumala, in all its right, is heaven. Its powers are indescribable. The Vedas have taken the form of rocks and appeared on Tirumala. Holiness has taken the form of water and is flowing as streams on Tirumala. Its holy peaks are Brahmaloka and other lokas. Srinivasa lives on Seshadri.

There was no human settlement at lower Tirupati until 1500. With the growing importance of upper Tirupati, a village formed at the present-day Kapilatheertham Road area and was named "kotturu". It was later shifted to the vicinity of Govindarajaswamy Temple which was consecrated around the year 1130 CE. Later the village grew into its present-day form around Govindaraja Swamy Temple which is now the heart of the city. It has now gained a lot of popularity as a tourism place.

Modern history
In 1932, Tirumala Venkateswara Temple was handed over to Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams by the TTD Act of 1932. In 2006, Tirupati Urban Development Authority (TUDA) and TTD together conducted "Tirupati Utsavam" which focused on the history of development of Tirupati town, kings who visited Tirumala and their contribution for development of the temple.[25] The fourth World Telugu Conference, a conference for furtherance of Telugu language, was conducted at Tirupati during December 2012 for three days.[26] In January 2017, the 104th Indian Science Congress (ISCA) meeting was held in Tirupati.


------------------
Swarnagiri


1. About Swarnagiri Temple
The Swarnagiri Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Venkateswara, located in Bhuvanagiri district, Telangana, India. The temple is situated on a hilltop and is one of the largest and most beautiful Balaji temples in South India.

This temple was built by the Manepalli family and was consecrated in 2024. The temple is built in the Dravidian style of architecture and has four Rajagopurams (gateway towers) on four sides. The main deity of the temple is a 12-foot-tall statue of Lord Venkateswara, which is said to be the largest in Telangana.
The temple is open to all devotees and is a popular pilgrimage destination. The temple is well-maintained and offers a variety of facilities for pilgrims, including accommodation, food, and transportation.
2. History
The Swarnagiri Temple was built by the Manepalli family, a prominent business family from Telangana. The construction of the temple began in 2018 and was completed in 2024. The temple was consecrated on March 7, 2024, by Tridandi Chinna Jeeyar Swami, a spiritual leader from the Visakhapatnam district of Andhra Pradesh.

3. Architecture
The Swarnagiri Temple is built in the Dravidian style of architecture. The temple has four Rajagopurams (gateway towers) on four sides. The main Rajagopuram, which is located on the eastern side of the temple, is 108 feet tall. The temple also has a number of mandapams (halls), including a Mahamandapam (main hall), a Kalyana Mandapam (wedding hall), and a Yagasala (sacrificial hall).
4. Deities
The main deity of the Swarnagiri Temple is a 12-foot-tall statue of Lord Venkateswara. The statue is made of black granite and is decorated with gold and silver ornaments. The statue is flanked by statues of his two consorts, Sridevi and Bhudevi.

The temple also houses several other deities, including Lord Shiva, Lord Vishnu, and Lord Ganesha.

5. Festivals
The Swarnagiri Temple celebrates many festivals throughout the year. The most important festival is the Brahmotsavam, which is celebrated in March or April. The Brahmotsavam is a 10-day festival, which features many religious and cultural events.



---------------
Vijayawada
Kanaka Durga Temple, officially known as Sri Durga Malleswara Swamyvarla Devasthanam, is a Hindu temple dedicated to Kanaka Durga. The deity in this temple is also popularly referred as Kanaka Durga. The temple is located in Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh, India on the Indrakeeladri hill on the banks of Krishna River.[1] Kaalika Purana, Durgaa Sapthashati and other Vedic literature have mentioned about Kanaka Durga on the Indrakeelaadri and have described the deity as Swayambhu, (self-manifested) in Triteeya Kalpa.

The popular legend is about the triumph of Kanaka Durga over the demon King Mahishasura. It is said that the growing menace of demons became unbearable for the natives. Sage Indrakila practiced severe penance, and when the goddess appeared the sage pleaded to her to reside on his head and keep a vigil on the wicked demons. As per his wishes of killing the demons, Durga made Indrakila her permanent abode. Later, she also slayed the demon king Mahishasura freeing the people of Vijayawada from evil.[2]

At the Kanaka Durga temple, the enchanting 4-foot-high (1.2 m) icon of the deity is bedecked in glittering ornaments and bright flowers. Her icon here depicts her eight-armed form, each holding a powerful weapon, in a standing posture over the demon Mahishashura and piercing him with her trident. The goddess is the epitome of beauty.[citation needed]


Om Symbol at Kanaka Durga Temple.
Worship
Kanaka Durga Temple is synonymous with Vijayawada. It is mentioned in the sacred texts.[3]


View of Temple Complex from Prakasam Barrage

A nearby temple viewed from Prakasam Barrage on night lights
It is mentioned in the Hindu scriptures that the deity in the Sri Kanaka Durgamma Devasthanam is regarded as Swayambhu or self-manifested, hence considered very powerful.[citation needed]

During the month of Sraavanam, Varalakshmi Vratam is performed on all Fridays with special reverence. More than 20,000 people attends the celebrations during this month.[4]

Special pujas are performed during Dasara also called Navaratri. The festival of Dasara is celebrated here in this temple every year. A large number of pilgrims attend the colourful celebrations and take a holy dip in the Krishna River.[5] Ten forms of Kanaka Durga are worshipped in the period of 10 days (Nine days of Navratri and one day of Dussehra). The ten forms are:[6]

Swarna Kavachalankrita Durga
Bala Tripurasundari
Annapurna
Gayatri
Lalita Tripura Sundari
Saraswati
Mahalakshmi,[7] she is adorned as Mahalaxmi on the seventh day
Durga
Mahishasura Mardini
Raja Rajeswari Devi
Inscriptions of different dynasties are found in the temple.[8]

Transport

Durga Temple-Vijayawada
Located in the heart of Vijayawada city, the temple is just a 10 minutes drive from the railway station and Bus stand and about 20 km from airport. Temple buses are available at bus stand and railway station for every 20 minutes. Vijayawada is located 275 kilometers from Hyderabad. It is well connected by road, rail and air from all parts of the country.

Sakambhari festival
The annual Sakambhari festival is celebrated in Ashadha month with deep piety and ceremonies. During the three-day-long festival, Kanaka Durga assumes the form of Sakambhari or Banasankari Amma of the Banashankari Amma Temple, wherein prayers are offered to the Goddess to bless all vegetables, agriculture, and food so that they are plentiful and capable of nourishing the multitude. Sakambari festival is celebrated from Sukla Paksha Thrayodashi to Purnima, of Ashadha month every year.[9] Goddess Sakambhari temple is situated in Shivalik Mountain range near to Saharanpur in Uttar Pradesh.


Shaktipeeth Shakambhari 


----------
Mallikarjun Temple

Sri Bhramaramba Mallikarjuna Temple (IAST: Mallikārjuna) or Srisailam Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to the deities Shiva and Parvati, located at Srisailam in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is significant to the Hindu sects of both Shaivism and Shaktism as this temple is referred to as one of the twelve Jyotirlingas of Shiva and as one of the eighteen Shakti Pithas, centres of the Hindu Goddess.[1] Shiva is worshiped as Mallikarjuna, and is represented by the lingam. His consort Parvati is depicted as Bhramaramba.

Legend
When Shiva and Parvati decided to find suitable brides for their sons. Shiva got Buddhi (intellect) and Siddhi (spiritual power) married to Ganesha. Kartikeya on his return was enraged and went away to stay alone on Mount Krauncha in Palani in the name of Kumara brahmachari. On seeing his father coming over to pacify him, he tried to move to another place, but on the request of the Devas, stayed close by. The place where Shiva and Parvati stayed came to be known as Srisailam.[2]

As per Hindu legend, the presiding deity in the form of Linga (an iconic form of Shiva) was worshipped with jasmine (locally called in Telugu as Mallika), leading to the name of presiding deity as Mallikarjuna.[3]

History
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2017)
There are inscriptional evidence from the Satavahana dynasty which place the temple to be existent from the 2nd century. Most modern additions were done during the time of king Harihara I of Vijayanagara Empire.[3] The veerasheromandapam and paathalaganga steps was constructed during the time of Reddi Kingdom.

Architecture
The temple complex covers 2 hectares and houses four gateway towers known as gopurams. The temple has numerous shrines, with those of Mallikarjuna and Bhramaramba being the most prominent. The temple complex houses many halls; the most notable is the Mukha Mandapa built during the Vijayanagar period. The temple is situated facing East. The center mandapam has several pillars, with a huge idol of Nadikeshwara. The temple is enclosed by tall walls measuring 183 m (600 ft) by 152 m (499 ft) and 8.5 m (28 ft) tall. There are a number of sculptures in the precinct each rising above another. The Mukamandapa, the hall leading to the sanctum, has intricately sculpted pillars. The shrine where Mallikarjuna is housed is considered the oldest in the temple, dating back to the 7th century. There is a Sahasra linga (1000 linga), believed to have been commissioned by Rama and five other lingams believed to have been commissioned by Pandavas. A mirror hall in the first precinct has images of Nataraja.[3]

-------------------
Annavaram

Sri Veera Venkata Satyanarayana Swamy Temple or Annavaram Temple is a Hindu-Vaishnavite temple situated at Annavaram town in Kakinada district, of Andhra Pradesh state, India.[1] The temple is on a hillock named Ratnagiri[1] and is dedicated to Veera Venkata Satyanarayana, an incarnation of Lord Vishnu.

Administration
The temple is being administered under Endowments department of Andhra Pradesh by a Trust board of 13 members.[2]

Architecture
The temple is situated on Ratnagiri hill on the banks of river Pampa. It can be accessed by both foot steps made of stone and by road (3km). The Temple resembles a chariot with four wheels in four corners.[3] The main sanctum is in two floors[citation needed] and main entrance had been gold plated.[1] The temple hosts mandapam to conduct Satyanaraya Vrathams.[3]

Poojas and Festivals
Satyanarayana Vratam

------------------
Dwarapudi

Ayyappa Swamy Temple Dwarapudi is dedicated to Lord Ayyappa. This temple popular by the name “Andhra Vaikuntam” or “Andhra Sabarimala” and is located near to Rajahmundry.
Ayyappa Swamy Temple Dwarapudi History
The Idol of Ayyappa Swamy was installed in the year 1989 by Kanchi Peetadhi Pathi Swamy Jayendra Saraswati. This idol was prepared using five metals gold, silver, lead, copper and iron which is called Panchaloha. There are 18 holy steps to the shrines similar to Sabarimala steps.Devotees who practice Ayyappa Deeksha will their Deeksha by visiting this temple. Unlike Sabarimala, there is no age restriction for female devotees, anyone can visit this holy shrine. Devotees who can’t travel long used to end their Deeksha by visiting this temple. This temple will be heavily crowded during Makara Sankranti day. Thousands of devotees who were in Deeksha used to visit this temple to watch Makara Jyoti and Makara Vilakku which marks the ends of their Deeksha. On Makara Sankranti day, Lord Ayyappa will be taken out in a procession on a Hamsa shaped chariot.
There are many other temples located within the temple complex. There is a shrine for Lord Siva, Venkateswara Swamy and Saibaba. Huge Statues of Anjaneya, Ganesha, Nandi, Nataraja in the premises attracts devotees.

----------------